---
layout: page
title: Opportunities
---
### Postdoc in Remote Sensing of Environmental Change
We are looking for a postdoctoral research associate to conduct research on urban remote sensing and climatology in the Department of Geography and Environmental Sustainability at the University of Oklahoma. This individual will be engaged with a new NASA Land Cover and Land Use Change Project on multi-source, multi-resolution imaging of urban land cover for predicting human heat exposure. The geographic focus is the Gujarat State of India, where rapidly expanding cities are increasing subjected to extreme heat waves. Objectives include high-resolution mapping of local climate zones, LST data fusion to develop high spatial and temporal resolution products, and high-resolution numerical weather modeling of humid heat impacts. The postdoc will have opportunities to help develop the research methodology and extend the work to address new questions. The position will be in the EcoGRAPH research group under Dr. Mike Wimberly and will involve collaboration with Dr. Chengbin Deng in the Center for Spatial Analysis and Dr. Chenahao Wang in the School of Meteorology.

A Ph.D. and research experience with geospatial data analysis and satellite remote sensing is required for the position. The Ph.D. must be completed before starting the position. The desired candidate should have strong writing and communication skills combined with programming experience using relevant platforms such as R, Python, or the Google Earth Engine API. This position is available beginning in September 2024, although a later start date is negotiable. To apply, please send a letter of interest, CV, and contact information for three references to Dr. Mike Wimberly at mcwimberly@ou.edu. Review of applications will begin in August 2024 and will continue until the position is filled. Feel free to send Dr. Wimberly an email first if you have questions about the position.

#### Equal Employment Opportunity Statement
The University of Oklahoma, in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, genetic information, gender identity, gender expression, age, religion, disability, political beliefs, or status as a veteran in any of its policies, practices, or procedures. This includes, but is not limited to:  admissions, employment, financial aid, housing, services in educational programs or activities, or health care services that the University operates or provides.

#### Diversity Statement 
The University of Oklahoma is committed to achieving a diverse, equitable and inclusive university community by recognizing each person's unique contributions, background, and perspectives. The University of Oklahoma strives to cultivate a sense of belonging and emotional support for all, recognizing that fostering an inclusive environment for all is vital in the pursuit of academic and inclusive excellence in all aspects of our institutional mission.

#### Mission of the University of Oklahoma
The Mission of the University of Oklahoma is to provide the best possible educational experience for our students through excellence in teaching, research and creative activity, and service to the state and society.


### Graduate Students
The Department of Geography and Environmental Sustainability accepts application for fall admission every year, and applications are due on January 15. See the [Graduate Programs Website](https://www.ou.edu/ags/geography/degree-programs/graduate-program) for more information on the application process.

Dr. Wimberly advises graduate students in Geography and Environmental Sustainability who are interested in pursuing research on environmental change and its implications for human health and well-being. Most of the work we do is highly interdisciplinary and falls under the rubric of emerging fields such as GeoHealth, One Health, and Planetary Health. Specific areas of emphasis include the effects of climate and land use on vector-borne pathogens, urban green spaces and microenvironments in growing cities,  and forest landscape dynamics in temperature and tropical ecosystems. Prospective graduate students should have strong interest in one of these areas with relevant coursework or professional experience. Much of our work involves processing and analyzing large geospatial datasets, and skill with computer programming is essential for these tasks. 

Students who are interested in graduate study in the Department of Geography and Environmental Sustainability should visit the department's [Graduate Programs Website](https://www.ou.edu/ags/geography/degree-programs/graduate-program) for more information. Funding is sometimes available through graduate research assistantships (GRA), which are typically associated with research grants. If a GRA is available, we will put out a specific announcement to recruit applicants for that position. Funding is also  available through a limited number of graduate teaching assistant (GTA) positions that are offered by the department. Selection of GTAs is a competitive process that is conducted at the department level. To be considered for GTA funding, the submission deadlines are January 15 for the next fall semester and September 1 for the next spring semester. Students who are interested in studying with Dr. Wimberly should submit an inquiry well in advance of these dates. Send a statement of research interests, CV, and copies of transcripts to Dr. Mike wimberly at mcwimberly@ou.edu. 


